RepoDb - alternative ORM 

When job ads or interviews or whatever ask for "passionate" people, they really mean passion in the Passion of the Christ sense, not the lust-and-zeal sense: A deep, preternatural tolerance for suffering, and one which ultimately cannot be sustained by mortals. - Bogost https://twitter.com/ibogost/status/1283042404904439816

We still know very little about this disease, but people are still happy to sacrifice you in advance, in unknown ways, for their immediate political or financial benefit. - Bogost https://twitter.com/ibogost/status/1282466051930951681

Muda is a Lean engineering catch-all term for non-value-added activities, namely waste. Do you recognise any of these in your own company?

Wrong work: building functionality no one uses, or the wrong functionality due to a lack of understanding
Watching the watchers: updating the PMO before they update the portfolio director before they update the VP before….
Old routines: attending a bi-weekly portfolio review because, well, we’ve always done it
Late engagement: a post-dev security gate review highlighting an issue, delaying deployment
Mismatched priorities: waiting on a Cloud Centre of Excellence to prioritise and build a new AMI
Slow approvals: waiting for a quarterly review to get approval to move to the next stage of development
Too many chiefs: decisions being made but overturned by someone else who claims to have the decision-making rights
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/enterprise-strategy/making-time-to-change-part-1/ -> http://asserttrue.blogspot.com/2013/01/muda-mura-muri-writers-perspective.html


https://hofmannsven.com/2019/commit-message-driven-development -> https://andrewfeeney.me/articles/commit-message-driven-development
It's simple enough to actually work.
It forces you to make a decision.
It removes the friction of starting.
It requires you to single-task.
Here are some of the benefits I discovered while working with this approach:
(This can start with a message file having the header and then adding why) 
Scope
It helps me to decide what to work on upfront. The commit message defines the scope and holds me accountable. The commit message is like a micro goal.
Structure
It helps me to logically group and later review my commits because each commit has a precise goal.
Focus
It helps me to remember what I decided to work on.
It also helps me to remember what I was working on in a previous (unfinished or interrupted) session.
-> 'm not sold on doing this at the commit level, but we have been using Pull Requests on Github in this fashion for Wufoo and SurveyMonkey. We start with an initial commit to start the branch for a new feature and then immediately initiate a Pull Request. That pull request contains a list of items that need to be done for the feature and as it gets developed you can see how commits are working towards making that pull request ready. This also helps tremendously with code reviews because you can do them as the feature is being developed.
What's nice about this method for us is that you can just look at the list of active pull requests for a project and see what features are in active development and get an easy way to drill down into the progress of each. 

I guess you could call it Pull Request Driven Development.

https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=4386969 

->The Ivy Lee Method
During his 15 minutes with each executive, Ivy Lee explained his simple daily routine for achieving peak productivity:

At the end of each work day, write down the six most important things you need to accomplish tomorrow. Do not write down more than six tasks.
Prioritize those six items in order of their true importance.
When you arrive tomorrow, concentrate only on the first task. Work until the first task is finished before moving on to the second task.
Approach the rest of your list in the same fashion. At the end of the day, move any unfinished items to a new list of six tasks for the following day.
Repeat this process every working day. https://jamesclear.com/ivy-lee

he worthwhile problems are the ones you can really solve or help solve, the ones you can really contribute something to. 

 You will get the pleasure of success, and of helping your fellow man, even if it is only to answer a question in the mind of a colleague less able than you. You must not take away from yourself these pleasures because you have some erroneous idea of what is worthwhile.

You say you are a nameless man. You are not to your wife and to your child. You will not long remain so to your immediate colleagues if you can answer their simple questions when they come into your office. You are not nameless to me. Do not remain nameless to yourself – it is too sad a way to be. Know your place in the world and evaluate yourself fairly, not in terms of your naïve ideals of your own youth, nor in terms of what you erroneously imagine your teacher’s ideals are. https://lettersofnote.com/2015/10/23/do-not-remain-nameless-to-yourself/


software archeology 