---
title: Quantum worlds
---

# Quantum worlds

#pin

Clipped from: https://worldbuilding.stackexchange.com/questions/160330/my-mysterious-ruins-wander-around-and-change-on-their-own-whatd-be-a-rationa
Since there aren't any real constraints in the question, allow me to take a moment and define an entire multiverse:
Ink Bleeds Through the Sheets
In this setting, there is a multiverse which contained all possible universes, as is commonly shown in popular science fiction. 
However, something about this particular universe makes the divisions from its probabilistic neighbors somewhat weak. Other universes "bleed through", like ink soaking through a page to mark what lies beneath.
It appears that this typically only effects stationary structures, or portions thereof, likely because something has to remain in a specific location (within its home world) for a certain amount of time before the Bleedthrough starts to occur. Or maybe nothing living ever bleeds through because all these "home worlds" are already dead; who knows?
Natural terrain never appears to Bleedthrough (as far as anyone knows), likely because the entire process relies on probability: 
	• A given location can contain no structure (a value of "0), or any given structure (numbered 1 to ∞ for convenience). But it cannot be two values at once. Structures won't appear intersecting with others (either real or Bledthrough)
	• Air is displaced when one of these structures appears, but not solid objects such as Earth, one section of terrain cannot "replace" another.
The structures appear to self-repair any damage because the actual structure (in its home universe) had not been damaged by events in this setting. Instead, it just the Bleedthrough of the structure: a probabilistic shadow. When it's "self repairing", it's actually just a matter of the Bleedthrough re-asserting itself based on the original structure.
Probability Waveforms and Quantum Buzzwords
Strangely enough, no one has ever witnessed any of these Bleedthroughs occurring or vanishing. What they don't realize is that the simple act of observing a Bleedthrough (or lack thereof) locks the current probabilistic state of the area. 
These things are not happening because an intelligence makes them happen, but because observation by any intelligence prevents them from happening (or stopping).
