Tangy and Creamy Macaroni Salad Recipe
JOSHUA BOUSEL
14     PRINTER-FRIENDLY VERSION
Published: August 15, 2014 Last Updated: August 29, 2018
Tangy and Creamy Macaroni Salad Recipe
It may look like a standard macaroni salad, but this recipe delivers a tanginess and flavorful bite that elevates the backyard staple beyond the norm. [Photographs: Joshua Bousel]
https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2014/08/tangy-creamy-macaroni-salad-recipe.html
If you want nothing more than heavy, mayo-laden pasta, the ubiquitous deli macaroni salad is for you. This recipe, however, takes the standard and gives it a depth and tang that makes it stand out in a crowd.

Why this recipe works:

Boiling the pasta until very tender allows it to absorb the vinegar and dressing better; it firms up once cold so won't taste overcooked.
Sour cream, Dijon mustard, Worcestershire, and hot sauce give this dressing more depth than the standard macaroni salad.
Celery, shallots, and scallions give a crunchy texture.
Read more: How to Make Extra-Tangy, Extra-Creamy Macaroni Salad

YIELD:
Serves 8 to 10
ACTIVE TIME:
25 minutes
TOTAL TIME:
35 minutes plus 1 hour chilling
RATED:
    
TEXT ONLY 
 
 
 SAVE
Ingredients
For the Dressing:
1 1/2 cups mayonnaise
1/2 cup sour cream
3/4 cup whole milk
3 tablespoons Dijon mustard
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice from 1 lemon
1 tablespoon hot sauce, preferably Texas Pete
3/4 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
3/4 teaspoon garlic powder
 
For the Salad:
1 pound elbow macaroni
1/2 cup apple cider vinegar
1 rib celery, finely chopped
1/4 cup finely chopped shallots
4 scallions, finely sliced
Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper

Directions
1.
For the dressing: Whisk together all ingredients in a medium bowl. Set aside.


2.
For the Salad: In a large pot of salted boiling water, cook pasta until very tender, about 15 minutes. Drain pasta and transfer to a large bowl. Add vinegar and stir until completely absorbed. Let pasta stand until cool, about 10 minutes.


3.
Add dressing and stir until well coated. Stir in celery, shallots, and scallions. Season with salt and pepper. Cover and chill in refrigerator for at least 1 hour before serving.


