# The Warrior-Fire ant Imperial Colony
The Warrior-Fire ant Imperial Colony is the coalition between the two most dominant Ant species - the Warrior and Fire ants. While the Imperial Colony contains other species, they are more like servants, rather than "citizen". The ruthlessness of the Warrior ants and the perpetual strive for efficiency of the Fire ants made sure that any other ant competitors (unwilling to serve the 'Greater Good') were exterminated or forcibly enslaved (if they could be of use). In the last millennium, the Empire was formed, and transformed into the Global force that it is now. 
Currently the WAIC is waging war against the Termite Verticulus - seeing them as the last "worthy" threat to their absolute will. It has lasted half a century, and there aren't any signs of it stopping any time soon. The home terrain advantage of the termites allows them to hold off any light attacks, but an invasion on massive scale has brought down many prominent termite society hubs. With the Empire gaining and relocating resources, a lot of Termite lords believe that the current stalemate will result in their own demise, and have sought the help of the Paninsectium Hive. The negotiations are difficult, due to the Termites' pride, and the PH relentlessness of demands (merge territories - become one). There is no budging, because they know they are the only hope.
Smaller societies have sought refuge in the Cocoon Collective of Aiola, but ever since the new Grand Moth Matriarch was crowned, any and all pleads by "others" are automatically denied. Refugees that were taken in during the previous Government are systematically shunned and forced to leave. There are those brave enough to help the refugees, but they are few, far between, and ever waning in numbers. 
