Homemade Hot Chocolate Mix Recipe
STELLA PARKS
43     PRINTER-FRIENDLY VERSION
Make your own hot cocoa mix to keep on hand all winter long.

Published: February 6, 2019 Last Updated: May 10, 2019
Homemade Hot Chocolate Mix Recipe
[Photographs: Vicky Wasik]

With notes of caramel from toasted sugar, the rich taste of dark chocolate, and earthy depth from Dutch cocoa, this hot chocolate mix is simple and sophisticated all at once. Thanks to the solubility of toasted sugar and Dutch cocoa, it's also easy to dissolve in hot milk. If you like, try storing it with a vanilla bean tucked inside for added aroma.

Why It Works
Toasted sugar is more flavorful and soluble than white sugar. It creates a smooth and mellow drink.
White chocolate adds richness, body, and aroma.
Dutch cocoa is more soluble than natural styles, for a creamier mix.
Read more: How to Make the Best Hot Chocolate From Scratch

YIELD:
about 20 ounces
ACTIVE TIME:
5 minutes
TOTAL TIME:
about 5 minutes
RATED:
    
 SAVE
Ingredients
6 ounces moderately toasted sugar (about 1 cup minus 2 tablespoons; 170g)
5 ounces white chocolate, 30 to 35% cocoa butter (about 3/4 cup, finely chopped; 140g)
4 ounces dark chocolate, 75 to 80% cocoa solids (about 2/3 cup, finely chopped; 115g)
3 ounces Cacao Barry Extra Brute (about 1 cup; 85g)
2 ounces malted milk powder, such as Carnation or Hoosier Hill Farm (about 1/2 cup; 55g)
1 teaspoon instant espresso powder, not ground coffee, such as King Arthur
1 teaspoon (4g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same weight
1/2 teaspoon pure, ground vanilla bean powder, such as Heilala, or 1 leftover vanilla pod; see note for more details
https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2019/02/homemade-hot-chocolate-mix.html
Directions
1.
In the bowl of a food processor, combine toasted sugar, white chocolate, dark chocolate, Dutch cocoa, malted milk powder, instant espresso, salt, and vanilla powder (if using). Pulse until chocolate is fully ground and mixture looks powdery and dry. Transfer to airtight container and add the leftover vanilla bean pod (if using). Store at cool room temperature up until the date stamped on the package of white chocolate.

2.
To use, stir about 1 ounce (2 tablespoons; 28g) of the mix into 6 ounces hot milk. Season to taste with additional salt or vanilla, and serve hot.

 SAVE
Special Equipment
Food processor
Notes
In place of ground vanilla powder or a vanilla bean, the hot chocolate mix can be flavored with vanilla extract added along with the milk. Start with about 1/8 teaspoon per mug, and adjust to taste.
Make-Ahead and Storage
In an airtight container, the hot chocolate mix will keep at cool room temperature until the date stamped on the package of white chocolate.