Broiled Lemony Potatoes With Halloumi Cheese Recipe
MICHAEL HARLAN TURKELL
15     PRINTER-FRIENDLY VERSION
Browned on top, creamy on bottom, and bright with lemon, these broiled potatoes topped off with melty halloumi cheese combine the best of roast potatoes and gratin.

Published: September 18, 2018 Last Updated: March 27, 2019
Broiled Lemony Potatoes With Halloumi Cheese Recipe
[Photographs: Vicky Wasik]
https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2018/09/broiled-lemony-potatoes-with-halloumi-recipe.html
This easy one-skillet side dish—perfect with roasted meats—combines the best of several worlds. It takes inspiration from slow-roasted Greek potatoes, rich with lemon, olive oil, and oregano; presents them in potato-gratin form, as a layer of thin, shingled slices; and is topped off with browned and melty halloumi cheese, reminiscent of saganaki (minus the pyrotechnics).

Why It Works
The lemon juice not only adds flavor but also steams the potatoes from below, giving them a creamy texture.
Slicing the potatoes thinly and leaving them in a single shingled layer ensures they cook through in a short time under the broiler.
Read more: The Broiling Days of Summer: Greek Roast Potato/Saganaki/Gratin Mashup

YIELD:
Serves 2 to 4 as a side
ACTIVE TIME:
30 minutes
TOTAL TIME:
30 minutes
RATED:
    
TEXT ONLY 
 
 
 SAVE
Ingredients
2 tablespoons (30ml) extra-virgin olive oil
1 pound (450g) Yukon Gold potatoes, sliced 1/8 inch thick
Kosher or sea salt
Freshly ground black pepper
1/4 cup (60ml) fresh lemon juice, from about 1 lemon, plus zest of 1 lemon
8 ounces (225g) halloumi cheese, thinly sliced
2 teaspoons dried oregano

Directions
1.
Preheat broiler and set top oven rack about 6 inches from broiler element. Add olive oil to a 12-inch cast iron skillet and spread evenly all over.

2.
Add potatoes, shingling the slices around the pan in a single circular layer. Season with salt and pepper.


3.
Broil until the potatoes have puffed up slightly, mostly cooked through, and browned on top, about 7 minutes.

4.
Pour lemon juice all over potatoes and sprinkle zest on top. Add halloumi cheese in an even layer on top and broil until cheese is golden brown all over and potatoes are fully cooked through, about 4 minutes.


5.
Sprinkle oregano on top and serve.

 SAVE
Special Equipment
12-inch cast iron skillet