# The Halfling Community Council

The council consist of representatives of the main factions in the community
1. The Women's House - a coalition of smaller woman owned businesses like matchmakers, seamstresses, "seamstresses", healers, food stalls, etc. They tend to represent the more aggressive side of the council, enforcing strict control on behaviour and also form the backbone of the spy network of the council. They make sure there are boarding houses for new comers into the city, setup job boards and help people build new lives. Those services used to be exclusive to the halfling community, but have extended to other races in the last years and is open to anyone who is running into trouble. It's currently representative is a practical madam, owning a dock-side brothel, who makes sure things get done.
2. The Grain Guild - In the community brewers own their own inns and pubs and take pride in the quality of their ale. Back in their home regions they would also be growing the grains, but in the city this has evolved into a traders union with the bakers, making sure the supply is shared between the 2 sub-factions. Members tend to be the richest in the community and usually back financially any incentives the council undertakes like new buildings, paying community service salaries and/or bribes and legal expenses. The current leader is a mellow aging male halfling, who is focused on establishing an education backbone, to be shared with the neighbouring orc community. 
3. The Green Bands - The green bands represent the councils executive arm, who deal with the more unsavoury parts of maintaining the community like interrupting organized crime, dealing with city guard issues, making sure conflicts don't escalate, providing safe houses, providing jail security. There are rumours that they would stick people in an half-empty ale barrels and ship them to the mainland if the bands found they've done something heinous. Currently it's lead by a younger man, who used to be a highway man. 
4. The Circle - this is an organization of the spiritual and educational leaders in the community. It mostly consists of older druids and wise women from the homeland and white collar young'uns from the city, like lawyers, accountants and teachers. They usually don't have specific goals in the agenda, but make sure to advice to their best ability.  Currently they have 2 members on the council - an older wise woman, who only speaks in druidic and a younger man, lawyer, who works closely with the green bands on their current operations.
5. The Grove Post - this is the messenger guild, which arranges transport for goods and people across the city and back to the homeland. They tend to deal the most with outsiders and are very adept smugglers, and most halflings sailors are part of this organisation. In addition they handle letter delivery and are recognised as one of the most trustworthy messengers in the city, and most of the current green bands have been part of the guild in the past. The current leader is a young female halfling, famous for the fastest delivery times in the city. 