Light and Easy 5-Minute Fruit Mousse Recipe
NILA JONES
26     PRINTER-FRIENDLY VERSION
Published: January 14, 2015 Last Updated: April 10, 2019
Light and Easy 5-Minute Fruit Mousse Recipe
Fruit mousse, an easy, all-the-time dessert. [Photograph: Nila Jones]
https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2015/01/light-and-easy-five-minute-fruit-mousse-dessert-recipe.html
This delicious fruit mousse is wonderfully light and easy to make. It just takes five minutes, three ingredients, and a food processor. The result will delight even your pickiest guests.

Why this recipe works:

Because this mousse is made with frozen fruit, you can make it all year round.
This mousse makes a great last-minute dessert, because it only takes 5 minutes to make and uses ingredients you can easily keep on hand.
The egg white helps leaven a fruit puree into a light and fluffy dessert.
Note: This mousse contains raw egg white. Pasteurized egg whites can be used, though the mousse might not turn out quite as fluffy. Those concerned with the health risk of raw eggs should not make or consume this recipe. I call for a little refined sugar in this recipe, but feel free to use honey, maple syrup, or even stevia extract instead, or leave the sweetener out altogether.

Read more: Want to Make Company-Worthy Frozen Fruit Mousse? All You Need is 3 Ingredients and 5 Minutes

YIELD:
serves 4 to 6
ACTIVE TIME:
5 minutes
TOTAL TIME:
5 minutes
RATED:
    
TEXT ONLY 
 
 
 SAVE
Ingredients
8 1/2 ounces (about 2 1/4 cups) frozen berries or other fruit
2 tablespoons of sugar (or use sugar, honey, maple syrup or stevia extract to taste)
1 large egg white
Fresh berries and whipped cream for serving (optional)

Directions
1.
Add fruit to the bowl of a food processor. Process to a rough puree, about 1 minute. Add the sugar or another sweetener and pulse briefly to combine. If you're using a different sweetener, add a small amount at a time to taste.


2.
Add the egg white and process until smooth and fluffy and the mixture has lightened in color and doubled or tripled in volume, 2 to 3 minutes.


3.
If the mixture clings to the sides of the food processor's bowl too much (this may happen if the blade doesn't extend all the way to the sides of the bowl), transfer the mixture to a normal medium-sized bowl and beat with a mixer fitted with the whisk attachment until fluffy.


4.
Spoon the mousse into glasses and top or layer with fresh berries and/or whipped cream (optional). Serve immediately or store in the refrigerator for up to 2 hours (because this mousse has very little sugar in it, it's not very stable and it won't hold for longer than that).

 SAVE
Special Equipment
Food processor