Foolproof Béarnaise Sauce Recipe
THE FOOD LAB Unraveling the mysteries of home cooking through science.
J. KENJI LÓPEZ-ALT
26     PRINTER-FRIENDLY VERSION
Published: April 8, 2015 Last Updated: August 29, 2018
Foolproof B\u00e9arnaise Sauce Recipe
Rich, buttery, tarragon-flavored Béarnaise is the easiest elegant steak sauce to make at home. [Photographs: J. Kenji Lopez-Alt]
https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2015/04/foolproof-bearnaise-sauce-recipe.html
For my money, the very best classic steak sauce you can make at home, a sauce that will wow your guests with its flavor and elegance, and—most importantly—a sauce that can be made start to finish in under half an hour, is béarnaise. The catch (there's always a catch) is that made with the classic technique, it's very easy to mess up. Here is a foolproof technique that uses hot butter and a hand blender for perfect results every time.

Why this recipe works:

Blending hot butter into the vinegar and egg yolk mixture instead of whisking it over a double boiler makes for a foolproof and stable emulsion every time.
Read more: The Food Lab: How to Make Foolproof Béarnaise Sauce

YIELD:
Makes about 1 3/4 cups
ACTIVE TIME:
15 minutes
TOTAL TIME:
30 minutes
RATED:
    
TEXT ONLY 
 
 
 SAVE
Ingredients
1/4 cup white wine vinegar
1/2 cup dry white wine
3 sprigs tarragon, leaves finely minced, stems reserved separately
3 sprigs chervil, leaves finely minced, stems reserved separately (optional; if not using add an extra sprig of tarragon)
1 small shallot, roughly chopped
1/2 teaspoon whole black peppercorns
2 egg yolks
Kosher salt
1 1/2 sticks (12 tablespoons) unsalted butter

Directions
1.
Combine vinegar, wine, herb stems, shallots, and black peppercorns in a small saucepan. Bring to a simmer over medium-high heat and lower heat to maintain a gently simmer. Cook until reduced to about 1 1/2 tablespoons of liquid, about 15 minutes. Carefully strain liquid through a fine mesh strainer into a small bowl, pressing on the solids with the back of a spoon to extract as much liquid as possible.


2.
Combine vinegar reduction, egg yolk, and a pinch of salt in the bottom of a cup that barely fits the head of an immersion blender. Melt butter in a small saucepan over high heat, swirling constantly, until foaming subsides. Transfer butter to a 1-cup liquid measuring cup.


3.
Place head of immersion blender into the bottom of the cup and turn it on. With the blender constantly running, slowly pour hot butter into cup. It should emulsify with the egg yolk and vinegar reduction. Continue pouring until all butter is added. Sauce should be thick and creamy. If it is thin and runny, transfer to a large bowl set over a pot of barely simmering water. Whisk constantly and vigorously until sauce is thickened. Season to taste with salt. Whisk in chopped tarragon and chervil. Serve immediately, or transfer to a small lidded pot and keep in a warm place for up to 1 hour before serving. Béarnaise cannot be cooled and reheated.


 SAVE
Special Equipment
immersion blender