Mindflayer

Wednesday, December 27, 2017
1:19 AM

Clipped from: https://www.reddit.com/r/DnDBehindTheScreen/comments/79xq2d/an_updated_mindflayer/
If you couldn't tell by my previous two posts (How I design Villains and A new take on orcs), I don't believe in bad guys. That's not to say that I don't think villains exist, but simply that all villains have a reason for why they do what they do, and most of the time they think they're justified. The idea of "the other" being evil just isn't convincing to me... it just doesn't seem realistic. Anyways, that's enough introduction, let's get to the meat of this. So without further ado, I present the updated mindflayer! There is a TL;DR at the bottom.
So let's start with the basics. Flayers feed on psychic energy, and have two forms - leech and collective. The leech is a small slug like creature that enters through the ear and attaches itself to the brain of a living creature - acting as a drain and antenna of sorts so that a close by flayer can feed (using the equivalent of psychic frequencies, such that a flayer can only feed off his own leeches). 
In order to achieve this end, flayers (which clearly don't look like humans) need to stay close to a civilization but also hidden. In order to achieve this end, they have a variety of natural abilities, unique to each flayer. However, they generally all possess the following, although how often they can use them varies - greater invisibility, pass without a trace, gaseous form, suggestion, major illusion, sleep, dominate person, telekinesis, and move earth. All this combines to render life underground easy for a flayer. They can easily hide themselves, moving through crevices and cracks to find small pockets of open space near civilizations. 
A flayer almost always has multiple hosts with whom their leeches have attached. The effects are largely unnoticeable in most species, consisting mostly of melancholy, lack of appetite & will power, slight weakness and susceptibility to disease, and intense dreams consisting mostly of other people's experiences (the experiences of the shared hosts of the flayer). 
Sometimes, however, a flayer will fall in love with a host, at which point he/she mates with their brain. This is an intensely pleasurable experience for the flayer and most be done in person, generally while the host is asleep. The hosts body dies, but their consciousness is absorbed into the flayer collective. In return, 10% of the flayers collective consciousness is given to the leech, as it turns into a larvae and begins to work on the brain. After around 2 to 3 weeks, the body quickly transforms and a new mindflayer is spawned. They then use move-earth and invisibility to escape their graves and begin life as a new collective. 
For each host absorbed into the collective, one leech must be active. Moreover, the choice of absorbed host has very interesting effects. In particular, the physical experiences of the absorbed consciousness gives birth to new psychic powers in the flayer. For instance, if the absorbed host was a farmer, the flayer might learn to speak with plants after being absorbed. Psychic variety is thus passed down via mating, wherein the 10% of the flayers consciousness is passed along to the spawn. 
For this reason as well, most flayers rarely have more than 10 consciousnesses within them. To fall in love, mate, and give up 10% of their consciousness, only to gain a single consciousness in return creates a net loss of psychic energy. Over the course of a single flayer's life span (2-300 years), they often only mate 6 or 7 times. Moreover, not all flayers are successful in their first attempts to feed. Given that they cannot gain food on their own, have yet to master their physic powers, and are killed on sight by most if not all species, the life of a new spawn is difficult. It must find a host within the first 3 days of its life or shrivel and die. 
For this reason, flayers are clearly not solitary creatures. Although they are genderless and live alone, they exist as a psychic collective, each one deeply in love with each other. However, love being an intense emotion often leads to conflict. Thus, internal conflict is not uncommon among flayers. If the consciousnesses becomes too fragmented and quarrelsome, a mindflayer may become violent or attempt to quickly mate with many new hosts simply in order to dilute the consciousnesses inside. They also feel no remorse for "killing" their host body, as the consciousnesses continue to survive in the collective without the original host body being needed. Once absorbed, the new consciousness normally feels a deep sense of love and community, as well as freedom from the burdens of an earthly body. All they have to do is sit in a cave, occasionally produce leeches via the open ended tentacles where hair should be, and move only to make love or if they civilization moves.
Interestingly, when flayers try to feed off a creature with an de-centralized nervous system, it may place its leech anywhere within the creature. In particular, this is what creates the telepathic myconid collection. Tiny, immature leeches hide in the algae farmed by myconids, and once eaten, attach themselves to the inner walls of the myconid's digestive system. Flayers lucky enough to find a myconid civilization thus feed off the power of the entire myconid society - sometimes multiple thousands of consciousnesses at once. This clearly renders the flayer incredibly powerful. In order to protect his host society, the flayer often gifts them with powerful telepathy such that they might act more cohesively. 
If found, during mining, etc, the flayer simply turns invisible, uses suggestion, gaseous form, and illusions to quickly escape. Doing so however, requires great psychic mastery and the energy from multiple hosts. Again, expanding why only very few spawn survive long after their transformation. But whatever, this is getting long and I could talk for hours.
The point here is to explore individualism v. collectivism, especially in the context of strength and romantic relationships. What it means to give yourself up to a greater cause, and with clear parallels to "the singularity" (especially if the fragmented, quarrelsome flayer is introduced). Obviously, this sort of villain works very well if one or more of your party members are on either extreme of the left/right political spectrum, is in a particularly co-dependant relationship, is a real loner type, or is currently swearing off the opposite sex.
But whatever, this is getting long and I'm sure you've lost attention by this point.
TL;DR: Mindflayers are psychic collectives existing within one body which feed off the psychic energy of host bodies at a distance. They mate after falling deeply in love with a host via absorbing the foreign consciousnesses into the collective, and giving 10% of itself to its spawn. During the process, they often gain a new psychic power which corresponds to the previous life of the newest member of the collective. 2 to 3 weeks after death, the transformation happens quickly in the period of a few hours. The newborn flayer must then escape their tomb, and find a host body very quickly or die. All of this has a lot of really cool implications about how they live, etc...