Random Scroll Appearance

Roll on the following tables for unique scrolls!
Scroll Shape (d12)
1. Rectangular
2. Triangular
3. Star-Shaped
4. Square
5. Circular
6. Spiral
7. Ribbon
8. Small Card
9. Zig-zag
10. Impossibly Long (when unrolled)
11. Irregular Shape
12. Folded Dimensional Shape
Scroll Material (d20)
1. Paper
2. Parchment
3. Papyrus
4. Bamboo Slats
5. Stone Tablet or Slats
6. Iron Tablet or Slats
7. Copper Tablet or Slats
8. Gold Tablet or Slats
9. Silver Tablet or Slats
10. Bone Slats
11. Ice Sheet
12. Monster Skin
13. Cloth/Canvas
14. Leather
15. Magically Suspended Cloud
16. Large Plant Leaf
17. Woven Grass or Palms
18. Magically Suspended Water
19. Eternally Burning Paper
20. Translucent Arcane Sheet
Ink Material (d12)
1. Creature’s Blood
2. Kraken Ink
3. Powdered Gemstone
4. Powdered Dragon Scales
5. Ash or Charcoal
6. Pigments of Rare Plants
7. Glowing Arcane Lines
8. Magical Fire
9. Magical Lightning
10. Etched with Acid
11. Invisible Ink
12. Frozen Water (case keeps it magically frozen)
Scroll Case (d20)
1. Hollowed Bone
2. Hard or Soft Leather
3. Metal Container
4. Magical Fire or Water
5. Rolled in Leaves
6. Wire Spiral
7. Bamboo Rod
8. Ceramic Cylinder
9. Permanently Frozen Ice
10. Magically Invisible Material
11. Stone Cylinder
12. Glowing Arcane Material
13. Strips of Tree Bark
14. Jeweled Gold or Silver
15. Dried Humanoid Skin
16. Wrapped in Colored Ribbon
17. Animal Fur
18. Chainmail
19. Encased in Candle Wax
20. Hollowed Weapon Hilt/Haft
Scroll Contents (d20)
1. Complex geometric patterns
2. Concentric geometry with arcane symbols between
3. Incantation written in an obscure language. It must be translated to be used
4. Instructions detailing the spell’s formula
5. Incantation written in code that requires a cipher key. It must be decoded with an Intelligence check to be used
6. Animated imagery of the spellcasting process
7. Symbols that gain meaning only when certain conditions are met
8. Calligraphic manuscript with illuminated margins
9. Animated geometry, symbols, and patterns
10. Lines detailing the specifics of the weave of magic used in its creation
11. Animated advertisement for the scroll’s scribe and print shop
12. Repeating pattern whose shapes change colors seemingly at random
13. Incantation written in Common for the lay man to understand. Anyone can use this scroll if they can read it
14. Words that only appear under running water
15. The scroll is incomplete and requires an Intelligence (Arcana) check to finish it
16. A musical composition with lyrics that comprise the incantation
17. Floating text that hovers an inch above the page
18. Text that flies out to spiral around your head at eye level to read it
19. Text that tries to fly away if the scroll is opened for too long. Lost text must be recaptured with successful Dexterity checks.
20. Text that can only be read when the reader is blinded or has their eyes closed
How to Use the Scroll (d12)
1. Read the incantation detailed in the scroll
2. Trace the text or patterns with your finger
3. Charge magical energy into the scroll
4. Simply laying eyes on the scroll for a few seconds causes it to go off
5. Follow the scroll’s complex instructions for incantations and body movements.
6. Trace the text or patterns in arcane energy suspended in the air before you
7. Use magic to create music detailed by the scroll
8. Invoke deities that were involved in the scroll’s creation
9. Expose the scroll to a certain element (fire, water, air, earth) to release its power
10. Present the scroll to the spell’s target and speak the spell’s name with confidence
11. You use a material component required by the scroll’s text
12. Throw the scroll at the spell’s target
Alternative Scrolls
Scrolls can take many forms other than a simple slip of parchment. All a scroll really needs to do to work is be a one-time-use consumable spell. Try making your scrolls unique, so they might not even look like a scroll. Perhaps your character could create scrolls as these sorts of items.
Art. Carefully crafted artwork, whether a painting, sculpture, sketch, or piece of jewelry, that serves as the scroll. The materials are made from arcane reagents and the scroll can be read using the art’s depiction or perhaps patterns hidden within.
Cloth. The scroll is a woven textile that can be worn, with precious metal threads and rhinestones serving as the costly arcane components. The patterns in the cloth help you read the scroll.
Fetish. A scroll made with various natural and manufactured spell components and artistic reagents all carefully pulled into a totem or fetish. For instance, a staff’s crown, a dreamcatcher, a headdress, a decorated skull, or other such assemblage could serve as the scroll. Interpreting the meaning of the items’ arrangement and choice reads the scroll.
Gemstones. I once had a city of dwarves that didn’t use scrolls but instead stored spells in crystals and gemstones. The gem can be read by observing the arcane energy refracting within. They shine brightly in a flare of radiant light when they cast their spell before disappearing.
Plants. Tended plants that have been grown and infused with the scroll’s magic. It can be read by the patterns in the leaves or petals.
Tattoo/Henna. The scroll is tattooed or drawn onto the body of the user. It could either be the literal scroll or artistic interpretation using arcane geometric patterns.

From <https://www.tumblr.com/likes/#> 

