Clipped from: https://www.reddit.com/r/HomeServer/comments/89d62q/homeserver_remote_gaming/
[–]itsbentheboy   64G of RAM is not enough... 4 points5 points6 points 1 year ago (2 children)
Check out /r/VFIO!
A ton of us do it right now, and it has some benefits for homeserver enthusiasts, at the cost of some performance. 
A dedicated gaming machine will perform better than a Virtual one... but here are some reasons i game in a VM: 
	• I can host multiple OS's at the same time on one machine. 
	• I can roll-back to different "Snapshots" of my OS in case something goes wrong.
	• I can use cheaper used server gear to get near-premium current-gen consumer gear performance, at a much lower cost. 
	• server gear is interesting and fun (for me)
My setup is:
	• 2x Xeon 2680 V2 10 core processors
	• EVGA GTX 970 SC
	• 64 Gb DDR3 ECC Ram
	• 6x WD Red 8Tb drives
	• 2x 250Gb Samsung 850Evo SSD's
	• Host OS: Debian 9 Stretch
	• Filesystem: ZFS
	• QEMU/KVM and LXD for hypervisors
	• Supermicro X9DR3 Motherboard
Virtual Machines i run:
	• Emby Media Server
	• Free IPA Ldap server
	• Cockpit Server (metrics)
	• Minecraft Server (hosts 25 players)
	• Nginx Website
	• Zammad Helpdesk
	• qBittorrent Seeding Server for some personal torrents, and the Linux ISO's i use in my VM's. 
	• Guacamole Remote RDP server.
	• OpenVPN Server
	• Many more to come.

	• permalink
	• 
	• embed
	• save
	• 
	• parent
	• give award
	• 
[–]sega_gamegear   [S] 0 points1 point2 points 1 year ago (1 child)
Thanks, as you have knowledge here are some questions:
1) your system has 20 cores. If you have 10 VMs each with 2 cores assigned, would there be a problem with not enough cores for the system? Or does the allocation just indicate a maximum?
2) with some games (e.g. Valve games) I've heard that running in a VM is pretty much a VAC ban, is this the case? I realise for those you can play on the host, but that would mean at least two GPUs right?
3) the performance hit is obviously in terms of FPS, but what about input lag? Especially for first person shooters, lag would make my already not being a great player to being total trash....
Thanks, I'm sure I'll have some others. I did ask on VFIO but didn't get too much response. 
	• permalink
	• 
	• embed
	• save
	• 
	• parent
	• give award
	• 
[–]itsbentheboy   64G of RAM is not enough... 0 points1 point2 points 1 year ago (0 children)
No problem! 
would there be a problem with not enough cores for the system?
The virtualization systems i use are QEMU for windows based VM's, and LXC for linux based ones. Both of these make use of "Thin Provisioning" so that machines only allocate resources as they need them. If the guest is not using it though, it is free to be used by the host, or another guest. This allows you to "Overprovision" resources so that in theory the demand could exceed the hardware, as the guests have all been given permission for "X amount of CPU" or "X amount of RAM" 
Putting a little thought into provisioning resources can prevent this from happening, or you can simply "Under-Provision" to ensure that there is always some resources for the host. 
My Debian host runs on less than 1Gb of RAM and less than 5% of my CPU, so i just set the rest to be shared over the other VM's. Your headroom may be lower than mine, and you may need to limit some VM's on your machine. Depends on what you're running.
I've heard that running in a VM is pretty much a VAC ban
I have not heard of this, and have not experienced it myself. as far as the VM is concerned though, you can make it think that it is actually a real machine and hide the fact that it is in a VM. I would ask specific gaming communities if this is a known issue beforehand though if it's a concern. For the games i play, this has not come up once. 
the performance hit is obviously in terms of FPS, but what about input lag?
There is no input lag on keyboards and mice. 
To give them to the VM you can do a few different things: 
1) Passthrough a Host USB device using QEMU/KVM to dedicate specific devices plugged into the host to the Gaming VM when it is powered on. This returns them to the Host when the guest shuts down. (this is probably the easiest)
2) Passthrough a specific USB Hub or Controller, and then plug the Mouse and Keyboard into the ports for that controller. This is what i did. I added a 8-port USB3.0 PCI card, and just passed it to to my VM, so that i have 8 ports available in the Windows VM.
you could also get a KVM Switch, so that you can switch your keyboard, video, and mouse from the Host to Guest at the push of a button. This would incorporate one of the above methods for giving a USB device to the host, but is another common method for input management. 
	• permalink
	• 
	• embed
	• save
	• 
	• parent
	• give award
[–]Y5NP   0 points1 point2 points 1 year ago* (2 children)
Everyone's telling you it's a bad idea but it's your server and your gaming machine, do what you want. What kind of tasks are going on on the server? Are you worried about server loads affecting gaming performance? If not, you're likely fine. You seem to know what you're talking about, so just give it a try. If it doesn't work out for any reason, move the GPU out into a new gaming rig when you get the money, or vice versa.
As for the media center, you can repurpose your Pi for this running Kodi in some manner. You can absolutely stream media over the network without any issue, so your focus should be on how to handle the gaming.
Steam In-Home-Streaming is good enough for singleplayer experiences on the couch (and video playback or web surfing!), but for multiplayer twitch shooters (CSGO) or something like Rocket League, you're going to want to be using a display and input attached directly to the hardware.
My main gaming rig is a Windows VM (KVM+qemu) with GPU passthrough, a PCI USB card for finicky hardware (VR), and a dedicated SSD. The performance is there as long as you have the hardware compatibility. I play singleplayer games on my TV via a Steam Link, but solutions like Moonlight also exist for the Pi.
My home server is an i3 (4-thread) machine that sits at < 0.15 load 90% of the time. I wouldn't have any problems offloading all of its tasks to the same CPU as my gaming machine if I wanted to keep my gaming machine on all the time. I keep them separated mainly for power consumption reasons, but have been considering virtualizing my entire desktop on server hardware. Just keep in mind that without another physical machine from which to manage your hypervisor, you can easily wind up in an uncomfortable situation when you need to troubleshoot issues with the gaming VM.
