01 - A small, folded paper bird. When unfolded, it refolds itself. Any crumples or tears on it seem to fix after several minutes.
05 - A dried yellow tulip bulb that becomes healthy and opens again when brought into especially strong sunlight.
06 - A bracelet made from a lattice of woven brass. It adjusts to the wrist size of its wearer.
24 - A polished wooden carving of a fish. It turns a vibrant green when placed in water.
29 - A glazed porcelain pipe. Everything about it seems vaguely familiar, but you aren’t sure why.
30 - A crudely made wool glove. It’s always pleasantly warm.
31 - A somewhat oval-shaped… thing. You think it might be really, really stale bread.
34 - A velvet pouch filled with coarse sand. It feels weightless.
36 - A bronze brooch in the shape of a feather. It lets off a faint glow.
39 - A hollow reed that creates a low, soft whistle when blown. 
41 - A hairpin set with an iridescent opal. The gem appears to change color every day.
42 - A leaf that cannot decay. Purple speckles dapple its surface whenever it’s in the dark. 
44 - A figurine of a cat, perpetually coated in a layer of dust. 
45 - A waterskin filled with a slick, greasy oil. Patterns of snakes cover its sides.
57 - A gilded teacup, laced with a spiderweb of thin cracks. Despite the cracks, it never seems to break.
72 - A simple piece of dead coral. You feel comforted when you hold it.
Trick Coins - Always land on the same side no matter how many times you flip them.  Don’t get caught using them to gamble.
Magic Buttons - Can never be lost.  Even if they fall off your garment, they will reappear in your pouch or pocket the next day.
Ghost Torch - The smoke from this torch makes ghosts visible.
Magical Dye - These pigments can recolor almost any object.
Alluring Pinecone - I stole this item from Oglaf because I think it’s great (nsfw link).  I of course did not introduce it in so vulgar a fashion.
Cat Seeds - Magical seeds that if planted and cared for will grow into bulbs that will eventually bloom as kittens.  These kittens are like normal cats in most respects except that they don’t hunt and subsist on sunlight and water rather than food.  
Unbreakable Thread - Sewing thread that can’t be broken.  Lone exception to the “You break it, you buy it” rule of the store.
Demon Tears - Small crystalline stones that will strike fear into the hearts of those that are struck by them.
Charming Cufflinks - Gives a small bonus to diplomacy with folk of the opposite gender.
Elven Earrings - When worn, they give the illusion that you have elf ears.
Magical Umbrella - A hands free umbrella that floats above you when it rains and is not affected by wind
Fish Whistle - A whistle that drives fish mad and will cause them to literally leap into your boat or on shore.
Magic Chalk - Can write on any surface, even non-solid ones.  To erase, simply wipe it off with your hands.
Hate Spice - A seasoning which will cause the food to taste terrible to anyone who hates the cook.  
Magical Jelly Molds - Can either cook or freeze jelly like substances that are placed within them instantly.
Password Protected Coin Purse - Can only be opened if you know the password
Kinstone - Vibrates when relatives draw near. Useful alarm system for in-laws.
Water Magnet - Water is magnetically attracted to this unassuming chunk of metal
Lying Lipstick - Gives the wearer a small bonus on Bluff checks.

A spinning top that stands when it’s still and falls when it spins.

Login book

05 May 2019
13:24

Show’s the name of everyone within an area.

Point-O

05 May 2019
13:29

A ring which will not lay flat, but rather stands on its edge.

Sound of whistle past

05 May 2019
13:28

A whistle whose sound is delayed by one full day after it is blown.

Unzip everything zipper

Wayfinder stone

05 May 2019
13:25

Speaking a locations name while holding the stone causes it to pull in the locations direction.

Or shows a star map?

The Ring of the Grammarian

05 May 2019
15:12

https://www.reddit.com/r/DnD/comments/68lw54/my_party_had_to_sneak_into_a_castle_to_get_a_plot/

I've also included an item in my campaign called "" which allows you to change one letter in any spell and the DM controls the effects

From <https://keep.google.com/u/0/#NOTE/1bNSRm7eS-4XrKXiGCFzGsneAP0gz1eJbmiviYX3mMBrGTk0IkBvu5so0blk0RRnyeZ8o> 

Wizard's Diary
A wizard’s spell book that is heavily warded that if anyone who does not speak the command word tries to open this book, it will automatically open to a page where the entire spread is covered in Explosive Rune Glyphs.

From <https://keep.google.com/u/0/#NOTE/1vHpemCQPAw6Qp65Pzypcmc8CldZ2YRjLBbkDIoqNJe_OILpuy4xw1i7Klz7fIJos9Es> 
