---
title: s/
source: https://chadaustin.me/2017/01/s/
keywords: 
   - code-management
---

# s/



> At IMVU we solved this problem by introducing a directory to every project named `s/`.

- How do you build the project? `s/build`
- How do you run the tests? `s/test`
- How do you deploy? `s/deploy`
- How do you lint? `s/lint`
- How do you launch the program? `s/run`
- What if there's a server component? `s/server`
- How do you see what commands are available? `ls s`

At first there was some resistance, primarily to the name. "s is too short. Nobody will know what it means." But after living with it, it was perfect:

- It's short.
- It's on home row for both qwerty and dvorak.
- Unlike `bin` and `scripts`, `s` doesn't already have a semantic meaning. `bin`, for example, is often used for programs generated by the build script. Conflating that with project tooling is confusing.

`s` is a home only for project commands - the interface that developers use to interact with the project. These commands should use the same nomenclature as your company (e.g. if people say build, call it s/build; if people say compile, call it s/compile).

The scripts shouldn't have extensions, because, importantly, the programming language is an implementation detail. That is, `s/build.sh` or `s/build.py` are wrong. `s/build` lets you be consistent across projects and have the option to migrate from Python to Bash or whatever.

[Source](https://chadaustin.me/2017/01/s/)

[Convention Scripts](./20191126174345.md)