# Estimation

#pin

Having done hundreds of small to mid sized projects I take comfort in the fact estimating is a very distinct task that even the best of developers learn last.
I've got three tricks in my pocket that at least help me with this:
The first is that I go by the formula mentioned in "The Mythical Man-Month" — which is that the effort in larger projects is distributed as follows:
1/3 planning 1/6 coding 1/4 component test and early system test 1/4 system test, all components in hand
Developers tend to mainly estimate their coding time, which leads exactly to the effects mentioned. It also explains all the annoying situations with all the holdups once the project is "almost done", this is simply a systems test and will add another 25%.
The other is that I simply add 5-10% on top for each person involved into the project (dev, stakeholder, anything) for communication overhead. It usually holds true.
The third trick is meticuluous focus on lean delivery, which involves scoping down, early testing on as much as possible, hidden and pre-deadlines and setting tractable sub-milestones.
Unfortunately, all of these techniques don't accelerate the project, they just help you be more realistic. If you find something that accelerates complex projects, let me know ;-) 

Clipped from: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=21461652
>Yet for some reason people still insist that estimating non-trivial software is not only possible, but trivial.
It's always maddening to get into debates about this stuff with project managers who believe this nonsense. I know the Fibonacci point scale is supposed to address this by giving PMs something, but I've only ever seen it turn into time-estimates-by-proxy.
These days, I only ever give estimates in terms of time scale. A task will take "hours", "days", "weeks", or "months". As long as it's within my power, my team will only ever estimate on that scale. 

Clipped from: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=21461652
commandlinefan 10 hours ago [-] 

I can’t accurately estimate non-trivial software. I’ve never met anybody who can accurately estimate non-trivial software. I’ve never seen anybody claim to be able to accurately estimate non-trivial software. Yet for some reason people still insist that estimating non-trivial software is not only possible, but trivial.

Clipped from: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=21461652
Most maddening thing I've seen is PM translating agile points to man-hours because that's what upper management requests.
Same people: you must complete assignments in the estimated time, or else, be prepared to work overtime including weekends.
It drives me bonkers. 
