# The Empire of Christ our Lord, circa 500 CE
#backup 

“The Will of Christ is the Will of Our Lord; the Will of Our Lord is the Will of God. Long Live Christ, Our Lord! Long Live his Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth! Hail his Most Holy Majesty, Jesus, the first of his name, Son of God, King of the Israelites, Emperor of Heaven on Earth, Saviour of all Mankind, the True Messiah!” - Judas Iscariot, upon the Coronation of Christ
According to legend, Jesus of Nazareth, the Christ and one true Messiah, was the Son of God and performed numerous miracles upon the people of Judea. One of these would become famous, as he purportedly fed a hungry crowd with nought but one loaf of bread and one fish. Word of the miracle that was this man spread throughout not only Judea, but the entirety of the Roman world. Eventually, his fame spelt what seemed to be his downfall, as during one of his sermons, he was arrested by the Roman authorities and sentenced to death.
However, all would not be lost. Mere hours before his scheduled crucifixion, Judas Iscariot led an armed rabble of Jewish militiamen - angered at the undermining of their local government through Jesus’ arrest - and followers of Jesus to break him out of Roman custody. After his flight from prison, however, Jerusalem fell into chaos. The Jewish people - both those who were followers of Christ and those who were not - had taken up arms against the Romans in defiance. Although Jesus wished for the rioting to subside so that it did not cause further unnecessary violence, the Jewish people had already called for open revolt, and the Roman legions had already been sighted marching towards Judea.
In order to bring Jerusalem under control, Judas and the other disciples pleaded for Jesus to take control of the revolt in order to prevent needless bloodshed. Jesus reluctantly agreed, and in Jerusalem later that day, Judas hastily crowned him the King of the Israelites, among other things. For the most part, the Jewish people and the followers of Christ rallied behind him. After his coronation, Jesus arranged a meeting with the Roman authorities; however, no deal could be made, and instead - upon the advice of Andrew and Judas - Jesus swallowed his pacifism and raised an army with the intention of ‘bringing peace to his people’.
Before he marched to war, he created the ‘Council of the Twelve’, consisting of his disciples, to advise his rule. He appoints Judas as the ‘Hand of Christ’ (a first-among-equals position of leadership), Andrew as Marshal, Matthew as Treasurer, James Son of Zebedee as High Physician, John as High Scribe, Peter as Head of the Church, Phillip as High Almoner, Bartholomew as High Steward, James Son of Alphaeus as Head of Medicine, Jude Thaddaeus as Spymaster, Thomas as Master of Construction and Simon as Master of Ships.
The first engagement of the war was the Battle of Golgotha Hill, in which the combined Israelite-Christian forces under Jesus managed to defeat a Roman force three times their size. Reportedly, during the battle a holy light shone down from the heavens and blinded the Roman commanders and equipment operators, allowing the Jesuits to have the first move and making the Roman war machines unable to accurately hit the Christian forces. After this momentous event, many Israelites who had previously fought only for their homeland now fought fully for Christ, who by now they undoubtedly believed to be the Messiah. After this battle, Jesus also managed to secure a string of victories at Gaza, Sinai and Alexandria, forcing the Romans out of the Middle East. At the end of the Christian Revolt, Jesus had secured the borders of Judea and far beyond. The Romans sued for peace, and Jesus offered it on the condition that his empire remain independent. This empire would survive across the centuries under various monarchs, up to the present time of 500 CE, where a newly-coronated Empress Mary I looks to Persia after a diplomatic incident. War, again, seems to be coming for the Christian Empire.

---

[Source](https://www.reddit.com/r/imaginarymaps/comments/6bimvj/the_empire_of_christ_our_lord_circa_500_ce/)